

      The MathWorks, Inc. Software License Agreement

Licensee may receive a full refund if within thirty (30) days 
from the date of delivery (the "Acceptance Period") Licensee 
does not accept the terms and conditions of this License and the 
applicable Addendum, or if Licensee terminates this License for 
any reason, within the Acceptance Period. 
 
LICENSE GRANT.  The MathWorks, Inc. ("MathWorks") hereby grants 
to Licensee a nonexclusive License to install and use the 
Programs and accompanying Documentation as provided herein.  The 
licensed Programs and Documentation shall at all times remain 
the property of MathWorks and/or its Licensors, and Licensee 
shall have no right, title, or interest therein, except as 
expressly set forth in this Agreement. 

LICENSE FOR THIRD PARTY SOFTWARE.  MathWorks has been granted 
licenses to distribute certain third party software.  As a 
condition of those licenses, MathWorks is required to distribute 
the software subject to specific terms and conditions, which may 
be different from or additional to those contained herein for 
MathWorks' Programs.  Licensee understands and agrees that 
acceptance of this Agreement also confirms Licensee's acceptance 
of the applicable provisions for use, including the restrictions 
on use, of such third party software.  The current applicable 
provisions may be viewed at 
http://www.mathworks.com/thirdpartylicense.  Licensee may also 
contact MathWorks to obtain the current applicable provisions.  
Licensee's breach of the applicable provisions of any third 
party's license terms shall also be considered a material breach 
of this Agreement.

DEFINITIONS 

Affiliate.  A legal entity which is controlled by, or controls, 
or is under common control with Licensee.  Control means (i) 
beneficial ownership of at least fifty percent (50%) of the 
voting securities of a corporation or other business 
organization with voting securities, or (ii) a fifty percent 
(50%) or greater interest in the profits and capital of a 
partnership or other business organization without voting 
securities. 

Concurrent Keys.  The combined number of users that may 
simultaneously operate a Program on a Concurrent License. 

Distribution.  The distribution on physical media and/or 
electronic distribution.

Documentation.   The user guides and instructional material, if 
any, accompanying delivery of a Program as may be updated from 
time to time.  Documentation may be delivered in printed and/or 
online forms, and in one or more languages.

Installation Type.   One or more of the Standalone Named User, 
Network Named User, Network Counted User, or Network Concurrent 
User installation type(s) available with respect to the License 
Option selected. 

Internal Operations. The use of a Program by employees of 
Licensee or an Affiliate for the purpose of performing services 
on behalf of the Licensee or Affiliate, or in the performance of 
services for Third Parties who engage Licensee or an Affiliate 
for such services.  As used herein, "employees" includes student 
interns and consultants of Licensee or its Affiliates.

License.  MathWorks' grant to Licensee of a nonexclusive right 
to install and use a Program in accordance with the License 
Option purchased.

Licensed Users.  Those users of the Programs, designated by the 
Licensee as authorized to use the Programs for Licensee's 
Internal Operations, to the extent permitted by the License 
Option purchased.

Licensee.  The individual or entity to whom MathWorks grants the 
License.  The Licensee is responsible for meeting the 
contractual obligations of the License, and ensuring that anyone 
permitted access to the Programs also meets such obligations.  

License Option.  The specific rights, restrictions, and 
obligations under which Licensee may install and use a Program 
pursuant to this Agreement, including those related to the 
permitted Installation Type(s) associated with the License 
Option selected, and the applicable Addendum. By accepting a 
Program during the Acceptance Period, Licensee also accepts the 
applicable rights and agrees to be bound by the applicable 
obligations and restrictions of the License Option purchased.

Licensor.  The person who, or entity which, grants a license to 
MathWorks to redistribute that person's or entity's intellectual 
property.

MAT-files.  The default data file format for importing and 
exporting data to MATLAB.  Usually has the filename extension 
".mat".

M-file.  A file containing a program or function written in the 
MATLAB language.  Usually has the filename extension ".m".

MDL-file.  A file containing a Simulink model.  Usually has the 
filename extension ".mdl".

Named User.  A specific individual, designated by the Licensee, 
who is assigned the right to use the Program(s) under a 
particular License.  Licensee is responsible to ensure that the 
total number of Named Users of each Program on a License does 
not exceed the number licensed for each Program.

P-file, P-code.  A pre-parsed version of the original M-file 
code for execution on MATLAB.  Usually has the filename 
extension ".p".

Program(s).   The computer software delivered hereunder, 
including enhancements and error corrections.  Each product from 
MathWorks is a separate Program.

Third Party.  Any person or legal entity that is not an 
Affiliate.

TLC-file.  A file containing Target Language Compiler 
instructions that explicitly control the way code is generated 
by Real-Time Workshop.


INSTALLATION AND USE. Specific rights, obligations, and 
restrictions apply to each License Option.  Licensee's right to 
install and use the Programs is determined by the License Option 
selected, including the permitted Installation Type(s) with 
respect to such License Option as set forth in the table below.  
By accepting the terms and conditions of the Agreement, Licensee 
also accepts the License Option purchased. 

License Options: Permitted Installation Types
   Individual: Standalone Named User
   Group: Standalone Named User, Network Named User
   Concurrent: Network Concurrent User
   Open: Standalone Named User, Network Counted User
   Enterprise Suite: Standalone Named User, Network Named User

In some countries, Standalone Named User is not available on 
Group, Open, and Enterprise Suite License Options.  Contact your 
local MathWorks representative for more information.

    LICENSE OPTIONS. 

       Individual.  The Individual License Option provides the 
       Standalone Named User Installation Type.  Program use is 
       restricted to the single, designated Named User.  

       Group. The Group License Option provides the Standalone 
       Named User and Network Named User Installation Types.  The 
       Programs may be operated by a combined workgroup of Named 
       Users (up to the maximum number of Named Users licensed to 
       use each Program).  It is not necessary to have an equal 
       number of Named Users in the workgroup licensed for each 
       Program, therefore Licensee must take action to ensure 
       that only the appropriate licensed user count is installed
       for each Program.  This License Option must be centrally 
       administered and maintained.  Licensee's central 
       administrator is responsible for (i) accurately installing, 
       administering, counting, and controlling the number of 
       Named Users allowed access to each Program, and (ii) the 
       distribution of new versions of the Programs delivered 
       during any paid Software Maintenance Service term.  

       Concurrent.  The Concurrent License Option provides the 
       Network Concurrent User Installation Type.  

       Open.  The Open License Option is an Annual License that 
       provides the Network Counted User Installation Type and the
       Standalone Named User Installation Type.  The combined 
       total of Named and Counted Users allowed access to each 
       Program may not exceed the number licensed for each 
       Program. 
       
       Enterprise Suite.  The Enterprise Suite License Option is a 
       Three-year Term License that provides the Standalone Named 
       User and Network Named User Installation Types.  The 
       Programs comprising the Suite are chosen by Licensee.  An 
       Enterprise Suite license must have the same number of Named 
       Users for each Program in the Suite.  The License fee shall 
       be due and payable in three (3) equal installments; the 
       first installment shall be due and payable upon 
       commencement of the license; the second shall be due and 
       payable at the beginning of the thirteenth month, and the 
       third shall be due and payable at the beginning of the 25th
       month of the Term.  Licensee shall have a Term license to 
       use the Programs, which is contingent upon the payment of 
       all three (3) License fee installments.  


    INSTALLATION TYPES.

       Standalone Named User.  Programs may be installed and 
       operated on one or more individual, standalone computers, 
       provided the Programs are only accessible to, and operated 
       by, a single Licensed User designated by the Licensee as 
       the "Named User" for that License.  The location(s) of the
       standalone computer(s) used by the Named User to run the 
       Programs is not limited; the computers may be located at 
       work, home, in a laboratory, or on a laptop.  Only one 
       Licensed User may be designated by Licensee to access or 
       use the Programs under each Named User License.  Licensee 
       may replace the Named User for the License, on a temporary 
       or permanent basis, provided only one Licensed User is 
       designated as the Named User at any given time.  

       Alternatively, for the Windows platform only, Licensee may 
       elect to install the Programs on a single designated 
       computer, provided the Programs are only operated from that
       designated computer's console by a single person at any 
       given time (a "Designated CPU Installation Type").  This 
       Designated CPU Installation Type may only be elected in 
       lieu of the Standalone Named User rights above, not in 
       addition to those rights, and is intended to accommodate a 
       single Windows computer shared by multiple users. 
       
       Network Named User.  Programs may be installed in a central
       location on the Licensee's network.  Licensee must run the 
       FLEXlm license manager in User-Based mode, and edit the 
       Local License Options file to maintain a list of Named 
       Users authorized to access and operate each Program.  
       Licensee may re-edit the list of Named Users in the Local 
       License Options file and replace Named Users for the 
       License, on a temporary or permanent basis, provided the 
       number of Named Users in the file never exceeds the number 
       licensed per Program. 

       Network Counted User.  The Programs may be installed in a 
       central location on a single designated network server.  
       Licensee must operate the FLEXlm license manager to create 
       a running log file of program use. Licensee must specify 
       the number of unique Licensed Users ("Counted Users") to be
       given access to the Programs over a moving one-year time 
       period.  The number of Counted Users must be monitored by 
       Licensee to ensure the total number of Counted Users does 
       not exceed the number licensed.  Should the number of users
       accessing the Programs exceed the number of Counted Users 
       licensed, Licensee agrees to order additional Network 
       Counted User Licenses.  Licensee must validate to MathWorks 
       the number of Network Counted Users on a quarterly basis 
       using a reporting package of MathWorks' choice. 

       Network Concurrent User.  The Programs may be installed in 
       a central location on a single designated network server. 
       Licensee may have as many Licensed Users simultaneously 
       operating a Program at any given time as the number of 
       Concurrent Keys purchased.  Surplus users will be denied 
       access.    Licensees of the Concurrent License option are 
       prohibited from providing Program access to users located 
       outside the country in which the license manager server is 
       installed unless Licensee has contracted for global use.  
       For the purposes of this Agreement, all servers located in 
       a member country of the North American Free Trade Agreement 
       ("NAFTA") shall be considered located in the same country 
       as those of the other NAFTA members, and all servers 
       located in a member country of the European Union ("EU") 
       shall be considered located in the same country as those of
       the other EU members.  


    EDUCATIONAL USE RESTRICTIONS. 

       Academic License.  Programs licensed to degree-granting 
       educational institutions at MathWorks' Academic License 
       discount are restricted to use in connection with on-campus
       computing facilities that are used solely in support of 
       classroom instruction and research activities of students, 
       teaching faculty and staff, and research staff.  The right 
       to use the Programs for any other purposes, including 
       commercial purposes, is expressly prohibited. 

       Classroom License.  Programs licensed to degree-granting 
       educational institutions at MathWorks' Classroom License 
       discount are further restricted to use in connection with 
       on-campus computing facilities that are used solely in 
       support of classroom instruction of students.  The right to
       use the Programs for any other purposes, including research
       and commercial purposes, or by faculty and staff, is 
       expressly prohibited. 

       Student License (Student versions of the Programs or any 
       Programs licensed at a student discount).  Student Licenses
       are restricted to use on a student's own computer.  Student
       Licenses are further restricted to use in connection with 
       courses offered by degree-granting institutions, either by 
       students working toward a degree, or by continuing 
       education students.  The right to use the Programs for any
       other purposes, including commercial purposes, is expressly
       prohibited.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
       contained in this Agreement, Student Licenses are 
       nontransferable.  Software Maintenance Service is not 
       provided with the Student License.

       Academic Group License Option.  Notwithstanding any other 
       provision of this Agreement, the Designated CPU 
       Installation Type is not limited to Windows and may be 
       used on Unix computers.  
 
Licensed Users, whether Named, Counted, or Concurrent, may run 
up to two (2) simultaneous MATLAB sessions, on the same or 
different computers.  

For Network Named User, Network Counted User, and Network 
Concurrent User Licenses, portions of the Programs may be 
installed on individual computers to accelerate startup times, 
as long as the installations on the individual computers are 
controlled by the license manager on the single network server.  

Use of the Documentation, whether provided in printed or online 
form, is licensed in the same manner as the Programs.  
Notwithstanding the foregoing, online Documentation may be 
posted on Licensee's intranet, provided it is not accessible by 
external sources or made available over the Internet. Portions 
of the online Documentation may be printed for reasonable use by 
Licensed Users.  Licensee may not otherwise republish the 
Documentation.  

Licensee shall use the Programs and Documentation only for 
Internal Operations.  Licensee may not sell, license, 
sublicense, rent, or make the Programs or Documentation 
available for use by any Third Parties.

Licensee shall not provide access to the Programs via a Web 
application without procuring specific rights to do so by 
licensing the MATLAB Web Server.

Licensee may not remove any copyright, trademark, proprietary 
rights, disclaimer or warning notice included on or embedded in 
any part of the Programs.  All copies of Programs shall contain 
all copyright and proprietary notices as in the original.  

MathWorks supplies its Programs and Documentation in archival 
form on Compact Disc (CD) and by means of electronic 
distribution via the Internet.  MathWorks provides the Licensee 
with a personal license password and/or license file that 
specifies the Programs licensed by Licensee.  Licensee shall not 
attempt to access or use Programs that Licensee is not currently 
licensed to use.  Furthermore, Licensee shall not disclose the 
personal license password and/or license file or allow them to 
be used except for installation of the Programs as provided 
herein. 

Licensee shall not decompile, disassemble or otherwise reverse 
engineer the Programs.  For European Union Licensees, the 
following rights apply: 

   EUROPEAN UNION:  Licensee may only decompile, disassemble, or 
   otherwise reverse engineer the Programs where any such act is 
   necessary to create an independent program that is 
   interoperable with the Programs or with another program or to
   observe, study, or test the functioning of the Programs solely
   in order to understand the ideas and principles that underlie 
   any element of the Programs ("the Permitted Objective") and 
   provided that:

   (a) this may only be done if the information necessary to 
   achieve the Permitted Objective has not already been made 
   available or has not been provided by MathWorks within a 
   reasonable time of a written request to MathWorks to provide 
   such information;

   (b) the compilation, disassembly, or reverse-engineering is 
   confined to those parts of the Programs necessary to achieve 
   the Permitted Objective;

   (c) the information gained is not used for anything other than 
   the Permitted Objective and is not disclosed to any other 
   person except as may be necessary to achieve the Permitted 
   Objective; and

   (d) the information obtained is not used to create a program 
   substantially similar in its expression to the Programs 
   including, but not limited to, expressions of the Programs in 
   other computer languages, or for any other act restricted by 
   copyright in the Programs.

Except as expressly provided by this Agreement, including the 
attached Addendum, Licensee may not adapt, translate, or convert 
"M-files", "MDL-files" or "P-code" contained in the Programs in 
order to create software, a principal purpose of which is to 
perform the same or similar functions as Programs licensed by 
MathWorks or which is intended to replace any component of the 
Programs.  The Licensee may not incorporate or use "M-files", 
"P-code", source code, or any other part of the Programs in or 
as part of another computer program without the consent of 
MathWorks.  A Licensed User may modify pieces of MathWorks' code 
for the Licensed User's own use.  A Licensed User may share such 
modified code with others provided each recipient is also a 
Licensed User for the original form of the code.  

Licensee shall take appropriate action by instruction, 
agreement, or otherwise with any persons permitted access to the 
Programs, so as to enable Licensee to satisfy its obligations 
under the terms of this Agreement.

FEDERAL ACQUISITION.  This provision applies to all acquisitions 
of the Program and Documentation by or for the federal 
government of the United States.  By accepting delivery of the 
Program, the government hereby agrees that this software 
qualifies as "commercial" computer software within the meaning 
of FAR Part 12.212, DFARS Part 227.7202-1, DFARS Part 227.7202-
3, DFARS Part 252.227-7013, and DFARS Part 252.227-7014.  The 
terms and conditions of this Agreement shall pertain to the 
government's use and disclosure of the Program and 
Documentation, and shall supersede any conflicting contractual 
terms or conditions.  If this License fails to meet the 
government's minimum needs or is inconsistent in any respect 
with federal procurement law, the government agrees to return 
the Program and Documentation, unused, to MathWorks. 

SOFTWARE MAINTENANCE SERVICE. During any paid Software 
Maintenance Service term, if applicable, MathWorks shall:  
deliver subsequent releases of the Programs that are not charged 
for separately; exert reasonable efforts to both (a) provide, 
within a reasonable time, workarounds for any material 
programming errors in the current release of the Programs that 
are directly attributable to MathWorks, and (b) correct such 
errors in the next available release, provided Licensee provides 
MathWorks with sufficient information to identify the problems.  
During this same paid Software Maintenance Service term, 
Licensee shall also be entitled to receive technical support by 
telephone, fax or electronic mail regarding the installation 
and/or use of the licensed Programs and their interaction with 
hardware, operating environments, and other software products. 
MathWorks reserves the option to discontinue, in whole or in 
part, offering Software Maintenance Service for any Program or 
platform.  

LICENSE DURATION (TERM).    This Agreement shall continue until 
the earlier of (a) termination by MathWorks or Licensee as 
provided below, or (b) such time as there are no Programs being 
licensed to Licensee hereunder.  

   For Annual Licenses:  LICENSEE UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES THAT EACH 
   ANNUAL LICENSE WILL TERMINATE AFTER EACH ONE (1) YEAR PERIOD, 
   UNLESS LICENSEE RENEWS ITS LICENSE BY REMITTING THE 
   THEN-CURRENT ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.  LICENSEE UNDERSTANDS THAT THE
   PROGRAMS WILL STOP OPERATING UNLESS LICENSEE PAYS THE LICENSE 
   FEE AND IS GIVEN NEW ANNUAL PASSCODES.  

   For Term Licenses:  LICENSEE UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES THAT EACH 
   TERM LICENSE WILL TERMINATE AFTER EXPIRATION OF THE LENGTH OF 
   TERM LICENSED, UNLESS LICENSEE RENEWS ITS LICENSE BY REMITTING 
   THE THEN-CURRENT TERM LICENSE FEE.  LICENSEE UNDERSTANDS THAT 
   THE PROGRAMS WILL STOP OPERATING UNLESS LICENSEE PAYS THE 
   LICENSE FEE AND IS GIVEN NEW TERM PASSCODES.  

   For Perpetual Licenses:  Licensee shall have the right to use 
   the Programs indefinitely, subject to the TERMINATION 
   provisions in this Agreement.  LICENSEE UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES
   THAT THE SOFTWARE MAINTENANCE SERVICE FOR EACH PERPETUAL 
   LICENSE WILL TERMINATE UPON EXPIRATION OF THE INITIAL SOFTWARE
   MAINTENANCE SERVICE TERM INCLUDED WITH THE PURCHASE OF THE 
   LICENSE.  Thereafter, the Software Maintenance Service term may
   be renewed for any Program, at the then-current price, as long 
   as MathWorks offers such Software Maintenance Service.  

   For Student Licenses:  The Student License term extends only 
   for the duration of Licensee's enrollment in a degree-granting 
   institution or participation in a continuing education program 
   of a degree-granting institution.

TERMINATION.  MathWorks may terminate this License grant, by 
written notice to Licensee if Licensee breaches any material 
term of this License, including failure to pay any License fees 
due, and Licensee has not cured such breach within sixty (60) 
days of written notification.  Licensee may terminate this 
License at any time, for any reason.  Licensee shall not be 
entitled to any refund if this License is terminated, except for 
License fees paid for any Programs for which the Acceptance 
Period has not expired at the time of termination.  Upon 
termination, Licensee shall promptly return all but archival 
copies of the Programs and Documentation in Licensee's 
possession or control, or promptly provide written certification 
of their destruction.

EXPORT CONTROL.  The Programs may be subject to U.S. export 
control laws.  Notwithstanding any other term of this Agreement 
or third party agreement, Licensee's rights under this Agreement 
may not be exercised by Licensee or any Third Party in violation 
of such laws and regulations, nor may this Agreement be 
transferred to any party where doing so would result in such a 
violation.  The terms of any limitation on the use, transfer or 
re-export of the Programs and Documentation imposed by MathWorks 
in any Destination Control Statement or other document for the 
purpose of export control shall prevail over any term in this 
Agreement.

TAXES, DUTIES, CUSTOMS.  Absent appropriate exemption 
certificates or other proof of tax exempt status, Licensee shall 
pay all taxes, duties, or customs, except for taxes based on 
MathWorks' net income.

USE OF NAME AND TRADEMARKS.  Licensee shall not use the name, 
trade names or trademarks of MathWorks or any of its Affiliates 
in any advertising, promotional literature or any other 
material, whether in written, electronic, or other form, 
distributed to any Third Party, except in the form provided by 
MathWorks, and then solely for purposes of identifying 
MathWorks' Programs. 

ASSIGNMENT. This License is nontransferable to a Third Party 
without MathWorks' consent, which shall not be unreasonably 
withheld.  This License may be transferred to an Affiliate 
provided that MathWorks is notified in writing of the transfer 
and the Affiliate accepts these same terms and conditions. 

LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.  THE PROGRAMS SHOULD NOT BE RELIED ON 
AS THE SOLE BASIS TO SOLVE A PROBLEM WHOSE INCORRECT SOLUTION 
COULD RESULT IN INJURY TO PERSON OR PROPERTY.  IF A PROGRAM IS 
EMPLOYED IN SUCH A MANNER, IT IS AT THE LICENSEE'S OWN RISK AND 
MATHWORKS AND ITS LICENSORS EXPLICITLY DISCLAIM ALL LIABILITY 
FOR SUCH MISUSE TO THE EXTENT ALLOWED BY LAW.  MATHWORKS' AND 
MATHWORKS' LICENSORS' LIABILITY FOR DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURY 
RESULTING FROM NEGLIGENCE OR FOR ANY OTHER MATTER IN RELATION TO 
WHICH LIABILITY BY LAW CANNOT BE EXCLUDED OR LIMITED SHALL NOT 
BE EXCLUDED OR LIMITED.  EXCEPT AS AFORESAID, (A) ANY OTHER 
LIABILITY OF MATHWORKS AND ITS LICENSORS (WHETHER IN RELATION TO 
BREACH OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) SHALL NOT IN TOTAL 
EXCEED THE AMOUNT PAID TO MATHWORKS UNDER THIS AGREEMENT IN THE 
TWELVE MONTH PERIOD PRECEDING THE CLAIM IN QUESTION, FOR THE 
PROGRAM WITH RESPECT TO WHICH THE LIABILITY IN QUESTION ARISES, 
AS INSTALLED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE INSTALLATION TYPE FOR WHICH 
USE OF THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED HEREUNDER; AND (B) MATHWORKS AND 
ITS LICENSORS SHALL HAVE NO LIABILITY FOR ANY INDIRECT OR 
CONSEQUENTIAL LOSS (WHETHER FORESEEABLE OR OTHERWISE AND 
INCLUDING LOSS OF PROFITS, LOSS OF BUSINESS, LOSS OF 
OPPORTUNITY, AND LOSS OF USE OF ANY COMPUTER HARDWARE OR 
SOFTWARE).  SOME STATES DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION 
OF INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, SO THE ABOVE EXCLUSION 
OR LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO LICENSEE. 

LIMITED WARRANTY/LIMITATION OF REMEDIES.  MathWorks warrants 
that MathWorks, on its own behalf or through its Licensors, has 
the right to grant the License rights hereunder.  MathWorks 
warrants that the physical media provided shall be free from 
defects in material and workmanship for a period of ninety (90) 
days from delivery, or it will be replaced by MathWorks at no 
cost to Licensee.  MathWorks further warrants, for a period of 
one (1) year from delivery or for the Term of the License, 
whichever is less, that each copy of each Program will conform 
in all material respects to the description of such Program's 
operation in the Documentation.  In the event that the Program 
does not operate as warranted, Licensee's exclusive remedy and 
MathWorks' sole liability under this warranty shall be a) the 
correction or workaround by MathWorks of major defects within a 
reasonable time, or b) should such correction or workaround 
prove neither satisfactory nor practical, termination of the 
relevant License and refund of the initial License fee paid to 
MathWorks for the Programs.  All requests for warranty 
assistance should be directed to The MathWorks, Inc., 3 Apple 
Hill Drive, Natick, MA 01760-2098, U.S.A.  EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY 
PROVIDED BY THIS AGREEMENT (OR AS IMPLIED BY LAW WHERE THE LAW 
PROVIDES THAT THE PARTICULAR TERMS IMPLIED CANNOT BE EXCLUDED BY 
CONTRACT), ALL OTHER CONDITIONS, WARRANTIES, OR OTHER TERMS 
(INCLUDING ANY WITH REGARD TO INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABLE 
QUALITY, OR FITNESS FOR PURPOSE) ARE EXCLUDED.  SOME STATES AND 
COUNTRIES DO NOT ALLOW LIMITATIONS ON HOW LONG AN IMPLIED 
WARRANTY LASTS, SO THE ABOVE LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO 
LICENSEE.  THIS WARRANTY GIVES LICENSEE SPECIFIC LEGAL RIGHTS 
AND LICENSEE MAY ALSO HAVE OTHER RIGHTS WHICH VARY FROM STATE TO 
STATE AND COUNTRY TO COUNTRY.  LICENSEE ACCEPTS RESPONSIBILITY 
FOR ITS USE OF THE PROGRAMS AND THE RESULTS OBTAINED THEREFROM. 

GENERAL. To the extent any governing law, treaty, or regulation 
is in conflict with this Agreement, the conflicting terms of 
this Agreement shall be superseded only to the extent necessary 
by such law, treaty, or regulation.  If any provision of this 
Agreement shall be otherwise unlawful, void, or otherwise 
unenforceable, that provision shall be enforced to the maximum 
extent permissible.  In either case, the remainder of this 
Agreement shall not be affected.  The parties agree that the 
U.N. Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 
shall not apply to this Agreement.  MathWorks shall be provided 
a reasonable opportunity for access to Licensee's records for 
the purpose of conducting an audit of fees, if any, due 
hereunder.  This Agreement and the applicable Addendum thereto 
contains the entire understanding of the parties and may not be 
modified or amended except by written instrument, executed by 
authorized representatives of MathWorks and Licensee.  In the 
event of any conflict between this Agreement and any purchase 
order executed by Licensee (whether executed before or after 
this Agreement), this Agreement shall prevail.

                                                       05/24/02

                 Application Deployment Addendum
        To The MathWorks, Inc. Software License Agreement


1. Purpose  
The MathWorks, Inc. Software License Agreement (the "Agreement") 
contains restrictions prohibiting Program modification, access 
by or distribution to Third Parties, and Web access.  Licensees 
of MathWorks' Deployment Programs, Libraries, and other selected 
Programs who are using Program source code and/or automatically 
generated code external to the licensed Programs, have rights 
and obligations in addition to those contained in the Agreement.  
This Addendum sets forth those additional rights and 
obligations. 

Except as provided in this Addendum, if a Licensed User 
distributes Derivative Forms of a Program outside of an 
Application or within a Standalone Application, each recipient 
must also be a Licensed User of the Program.  MathWorks or its 
Licensors retain all right, title, and interest in the 
Derivative Forms of its Programs.

2. Scope  
This Addendum does not apply to Licensee's own code.  Licensee 
may distribute, sublicense, and resell without restriction, M-
files, MDL-files, MEX-files and P-files written by Licensee, 
provided they do not include any code obtained from M-files, 
MAT-files, P-code, MDL-files, C/C++ files, TLC-files or other 
source files supplied as part of the licensed Programs.

3. Noncompetition  
Licensee agrees not to use the Programs, Derivative Forms, or 
Compiled Forms to distribute its own, or a Third Party's 
Application, a principal purpose of which, as solely determined 
by MathWorks, is to perform the same or similar functions as 
Programs licensed by MathWorks or which is intended to replace 
any component of the Programs.  Licensee shall not otherwise use 
the Programs to compete with the products or businesses of 
MathWorks by distributing complete Libraries, or any form of an 
entire Program or a substantial portion of a Program. 

4. Definitions 

    Application.  Licensee's software, any part of which was 
    developed using MathWorks' Programs, including Standalone and 
    Embedded Applications.  

    Application license.  A license granted by Licensee to its 
    end-users for the installation and use of Licensee's 
    Application.

    Compiled Forms.  The source code output of the MATLAB 
    Compiler, Real-Time Workshop, Stateflow Coder, Real-Time 
    Workshop Embedded Coder, and other code generation Programs, 
    as well as such source code converted to Object Code or 
    Linked forms.

    Derivative Forms.  A form of the Program that is based upon 
    one or more preexisting forms of the Program, such as a 
    revision, modification, translation, abridgment, condensation,
    expansion, or any other form in which the preexisting Program
    may be recast, transformed, or adapted, and that, if prepared 
    without MathWorks' authorization, would constitute a copyright 
    infringement or License breach.  

    Embedded Application.   Licensee's Standalone Application 
    developed for use on an embedded or dedicated processor, DSP,
    or computer, intended to perform functions in an environment 
    independent from the Programs.

    Encrypted P-code.  A form of P-code that is executable by 
    MATLAB or the MATLAB Runtime Server.  Encrypted P-code is 
    machine-readable but not human-readable.  
    
    Ineligible Programs.  Those Programs listed on MathWorks' 
    current Price List Addendum which are not eligible for 
    deployment, compilation, distribution, or Web access. 

    Linked.  The grouping together of multiple software components 
    into a single product.  For example, Libraries are Linked with 
    Applications.

    MATLAB Runtime Code.  MATLAB Runtime Server and Encrypted 
    P-code versions of licensed Programs.

    MEX-file.  Compiled C, C++, or Fortran functions that can be 
    called directly from MATLAB.

    Object Code, Binary.  The code created by a system compiler 
    from source code.  Also called "machine-readable code". 

    Relocatable object code.  A form of object code that does not 
    have a specific address mapping, but has been generated for 
    execution on a specific processor.  Relocatable object code
    can be Linked with an appropriate linker to resolve address 
    references and may be combined with other object code for 
    targeted execution on a specific processor.

    Source code.  Human-readable program code written in a 
    higher-level language such as C, C++, Java, MATLAB, or 
    Fortran, which must be translated or compiled into 
    machine-readable language before it can be executed by a 
    computer.

    Standalone Application.  An Application which does not require 
    the MATLAB Program to run. 

    Deployment Programs.  
        MATLAB Compiler
        MATLAB Runtime Server Development Kit
        Real-Time Workshop
        Real-Time Workshop Embedded Coder
        Stateflow Coder 
        Real-Time Windows Target
        xPC Target
        xPC Target Embedded Option
        MATLAB Web Server  
        MATLAB C/C++ Math Library
        MATLAB Graphics Library
        DSP Blockset

5. Deployment Programs

Licensees of MathWorks' Deployment Programs may automatically 
generate code from M-files and/or Simulink/Stateflow diagrams 
into one or more forms such as MEX-files, C, C++, P-code, 
relocatable object code, Linked binary forms, and other compiled 
forms (all hereinafter referred to as "Compiled Forms").  
Furthermore, Licensee may copy and deploy these Compiled Forms 
for use outside of the Programs.

Not all Programs are eligible for deployment within Licensee's 
Application.  For a list of those Programs which are ineligible 
for deployment ("Ineligible Programs"), consult MathWorks' 
current Price List Addendum or contact your local authorized 
MathWorks representative.

    5.1 MATLAB Application Deployment Programs

        5.1.1 MATLAB Compiler. Licensee may include, by 
        compilation for deployment, only those select M-files
        from the licensed Programs required for the Application. 

        Licensee may deploy, at no cost, copies of Applications 
        that incorporate Linked-in copies of the Object Code from
        the MATLAB C/C++ Math Library and MATLAB C/C++ Graphics 
        Library and compiled versions only of those select M-files
        from the licensed Programs required for the Application.  
        No further fees shall be due to MathWorks for such 
        deployment within Licensee's Application, regardless of 
        whether the Application is distributed solely for 
        Licensee's Internal Operations or to Third Parties. 

        In no event shall Licensee deploy the Libraries' header 
        files, or any form of an entire Program or a substantial 
        portion of a Program. 

        5.1.2 MATLAB Runtime Server Development Kit.  Use of each 
        MATLAB Runtime Server Development Kit is limited to a 
        single site designated by the Licensee.  Licensee may 
        include MATLAB Runtime Code as executable code fully 
        integrated into Licensee's Application.  In order to 
        distribute the Application, Licensee must purchase a 
        License to make runtime copies of the MATLAB Runtime Code.
        Runtime copies are Application-specific, meaning Licensee 
        must purchase separate runtime copies for each 
        Application.  The number of copies of the MATLAB Runtime 
        Code that Licensee may distribute at any given time must 
        be less than or equal to the number of runtime copies 
        purchased for each Program distributed with each 
        Application.  
        
        MATLAB Runtime Code may be installed on single designated 
        computers or on network servers.  Licensee or the 
        recipient of Licensee's Application, must accurately count
        the number of Named Users OR the maximum number of copies 
        installed on single designated computers.  The use of a 
        tracking system or license manager is recommended.  
        MathWorks shall be provided a reasonable opportunity for 
        access to Licensee's records for the purpose of conducting
        an audit of fees, if any, due hereunder. 

        5.1.3 Web Access

        The licensed Programs may not be operated from within a 
        Web Application without procuring a MATLAB Web Server 
        License. 

        MATLAB Web Server.  A Licensed User of the MATLAB Web 
        Server may call the licensed Programs from within their 
        own external Web Standalone Application, provided the 
        Licensed User's Web Standalone Application does not 
        provide access to the MATLAB command line, or any of the
        licensed Programs with code generation capabilities.  In
        addition, Licensed Users may not provide access to an 
        entire Program or a substantial portion of a Program.  
        Such operation of a Standalone Application via a Web 
        interface may be provided to an unlimited number of web 
        browser clients, at no cost, for Licensee's own use for 
        its Internal Operations, and for use by Third Parties. 

    5.2 Simulink and Stateflow Application Deployment Programs 

        5.2.1 Real-Time Workshop, Real-Time Workshop Embedded 
        Coder, Stateflow Coder, and DSP Blockset.  MathWorks 
        provides directories of C, C++, and TLC source code files
        that implement the real-time framework, code generation 
        instructions, libraries, and Application Programming 
        Interface (API) for use only with the code generated by 
        Real-Time Workshop, Real-Time Workshop Embedded Coder, 
        Stateflow Coder, and DSP Blockset.
        * Licensee may use, copy, and modify these files in source
          code form for different development targets, provided 
          that they are only copied for development use in 
          connection with the Real-Time Workshop, Real-Time 
          Workshop Embedded Coder, or Stateflow Coder Programs.
        * Licensee may copy and deploy these files outside of the
          Real-Time Workshop, Real-Time Workshop Embedded Coder, 
          and Stateflow Coder Programs in Linked binary form or 
          source code form, if used in combination with code 
          generated by those Programs as part of a larger 
          Standalone Application. 
        * No further fees shall be due to MathWorks for such 
          deployment within Licensee's Application, regardless of
          whether the Application is deployed solely for 
          Licensee's Internal Operations or to Third Parties.
        * Licensee is prohibited from creating a Real-Time 
          Workshop and/or Stateflow Coder code generation server 
          which bypasses MathWorks' normal license management 
          procedures.  

        5.2.2 Real-Time Windows Target.  Licensee may not 
        incorporate Real-Time Windows Target into an Application 
        for deployment without contracting with MathWorks for an
        OEM or VAR agreement. 

        5.2.3 xPC Target.  Licensee may develop Applications that 
        incorporate Linked-in copies of xPC Target and those files 
        required for the Application that have been compiled or 
        otherwise obtained from Real-Time Workshop and/or 
        Stateflow Coder on a single development PC, and download 
        that Application to a target PC directly connected to the 
        development PC by either Ethernet or serial connections.
  
            5.2.3.1 The right to distribute the Application beyond
            the target PC is contingent upon the purchase of a 
            License of the xPC Target Embedded Option.  No further 
            fees shall be due to MathWorks for such deployment 
            within Licensee's Application, regardless of whether 
            the Application is deployed solely for Licensee's 
            Internal Operations or to Third Parties.  
            Additionally, the Embedded Option License allows for 
            the deployment of API DLL's beyond the development PC.
            No further fees shall be due to MathWorks for such 
            deployment outside of an Application, regardless of 
            whether the API DLL's are deployed solely for 
            Licensee's Internal Operations or to Third Parties.  

6. Data Acquisition Toolbox  

MathWorks provides directories of source code files that 
implement the adaptor interface for the Data Acquisition 
Toolbox.  Licensee may use, copy, and modify the source code 
files for creation of Licensee's own adaptor for use with the 
Data Acquisition Toolbox. Licensee may copy and distribute 
Licensee's own adaptor outside of the Data Acquisition Toolbox, 
but only in Linked binary form for use with the Data Acquisition 
Toolbox.

7. Application Licensing

For any distribution of Applications containing Linked-in copies 
of Libraries, the MATLAB Runtime Server, and/or components of a 
Program in a Compiled Form to:

    Licensee's internal organization:  Licensee shall take 
    appropriate action by instruction, agreement, or otherwise 
    with any recipients of the Application, so as to enable 
    Licensee to satisfy its obligations under the terms of this 
    Addendum and the Agreement.
      
    Third Parties:  The Application shall be accompanied by an 
    Application license whose terms and conditions are at least as 
    restrictive as the Agreement, unless it is an Embedded 
    Application invisible to the end-user.  
    
    * The Application license for Third Parties must explicitly 
      exclude MathWorks and its Licensors from all liability for 
      damages or any obligation to provide remedial actions.  
    * In no circumstance shall Licensee include a warranty for any
      form of a Program that is inconsistent with or additional to 
      the warranty contained in the Agreement.  
    * All copyright and proprietary notices for the Programs that 
      appear in the original form delivered to Licensee shall be 
      duplicated and included with Licensee's own copyright 
      notices for the Application, wherever they appear.  
    * The additional translation, use, and deployment rights 
      granted in this Addendum are nontransferable without 
      MathWorks' consent and shall not be conveyed in Licensee's
      Application license. 
 
Notwithstanding the termination of the Agreement, all valid 
Application licenses shall remain and continue in full force and 
effect, and, if the Agreement was not terminated due to:  (i) 
Licensee's failure to pay the applicable fees to MathWorks, (ii) 
Licensee's violation of the License restrictions, or (iii) 
violation of MathWorks' proprietary rights in the Programs; then 
Licensee may continue to use the Programs to support 
Applications that have been placed in use pursuant to an 
Application license prior to the effective date of termination. 

8. Disclaimer of Obligations and Liability
  
MathWorks shall have no support or warranty obligations, and 
disclaims all liability, for Applications developed or 
distributed by Licensee.

LICENSEE AGREES THAT PRIOR TO USING, INCORPORATING, OR 
DISTRIBUTING THE PROGRAMS IN ANY APPLICATION, IT WILL THOROUGHLY 
TEST AND VALIDATE THE APPLICATION AND THE FUNCTIONALITY OF THE 
PROGRAMS IN THAT APPLICATION AND BE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY 
PROBLEMS OR FAILURES.    

Licensee will defend, indemnify, and hold harmless MathWorks and 
its Licensors, officers, directors, employees, agents and 
resellers from and against any claims, demands, or liabilities 
based on or arising from, out of or in connection with the 
creation, use, or Distribution of any Applications.

9. General

Licensee acknowledges that a material breach of the obligations 
set forth in this Addendum, which have not been cured within 
sixty (60) days of written notification from MathWorks, shall be 
grounds for termination as provided in the Agreement.

This Addendum is an Addendum to The MathWorks, Inc. Software 
License Agreement, the terms and conditions of which are 
incorporated herewith. Each capitalized term used herein and not 
defined herein shall have the meaning described to it in the 
Agreement.


                                                       05/24/02

